>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 12: LOOKING
AHEAD TO THE TOP PRIORITIES OF A
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION, AND
PREDICTING THE OUTCOME OF THE
ELECTION WITHOUT POLLS; ALSO,
THE LATEST FROM IRAQ IN THE
BATTLE FOR MOSUL.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PROTESTS AGAINST PRESIDENT-ELECT
DONALD TRUMP ARE CONTINUING IN
CITIES ACROSS THE COUNTRY THIS
WEEKEND.
TODAY IN NEW YORK, CHICAGO AND
LOS ANGELES, DEMONSTRATORS TOOK
TO THE STREETS TO PROTEST THE
RESULTS OF TUESDAY'S ELECTION.
IN MANHATTAN, THOUSANDS MARCHED
TWO MILES FROM DOWNTOWN'S UNION
SQUARE PAST TRUMP'S RESIDENCE
IN TRUMP TOWER ON FIFTH AVENUE.
FURTHER DEMONSTRATIONS ARE
PLANNED TONIGHT.
LAST NIGHT, THOUSANDS MARCHED IN
NEW YORK, L.A. AND OTHER CITIES
FOR A THIRD NIGHT IN A ROW.
PROTESTS WERE ALSO STAGED IN
CITIES IN STATES CARRIED BY
TRUMP, INCLUDING ATLANTA,
DALLAS, RALEIGH, IOWA CITY AND
KANSAS CITY, MISSOURI.
IN PORTLAND, OREGON, POLICE USED
TEAR GAS TO DISPERSE THE CROWD
AFTER POLICE SAY BURNING
PROJECTILES WERE THROWN AT THEM.
THE PROTESTERS ALSO SPRAYED
GRAFFITI ON BUILDINGS AND
BLOCKED TRAFFIC.
IN MIAMI, FLORIDA, PROTESTERS
BLOCKED PORTIONS OF INTERSTATE
395, FORCING HUNDREDS OF CARS TO
STOP.
DEMONSTRATIONS ARE ALSO
OCCURRING OVERSEAS.
TODAY IN GERMANY, ABOUT 300
PEOPLE PROTESTED TRUMP'S
ELECTION OUTSIDE THE U.S.
EMBASSY IN BERLIN.
IN HIS FIRST INTERVIEW SINCE
WINNING THE ELECTION, TRUMP
TELLS CBS NEWS' "60 MINUTES" HE
NO LONGER INTENDS TO FULLY
REPEAL PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
SIGNATURE LEGISLATION, THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.
TRUMP SAYS HE LIKES OBAMACARE'S
RULES BANNING INSURANCE
COMPANIES FROM DENYING COVERAGE
OVER PREEXISTING CONDITIONS AND
LETTING PARENTS COVER THEIR
CHILDREN UNTIL THEY TURN 26.
>> WHEN YOU REPLACE IT, ARE YOU
GOING TO MAKE SURE THAT PEOPLE
WITH PRECONDITIONS ARE STILL
COVERED?
>> YES, BECAUSE IT HAPPENS TO BE
ONE OF THE STRONGEST ASSETS.
>> YOU'RE GOING TO KEEP IT?
>> ALSO, WITH THE CHILDREN
LIVING WITH THEIR PARENTS FOR AN
EXTENDED PERIOD, WE'RE GOING
TO...
>> YOU'RE GOING TO KEEP THAT?
>> ...VERY MUCH TRY AND KEEP
THAT.
IT ADDS COST, BUT IT'S VERY MUCH
SOMETHING WE'RE GOING TO TRY AND
KEEP.
>> Stewart: TODAY, IN A
CONFERENCE CALL WITH CAMPAIGN
CONTRIBUTORS, HILLARY CLINTON
SAID SHE WAS "HEARTBROKEN" BY
THE LOSS AND POINTED TO F.B.I.
DIRECTOR JAMES COMEY IN THE
CAMPAIGN'S FINAL DAYS, RESUMING
THE INVESTIGATION INTO HER
PRIVATE EMAIL SERVER SHE USED
WHILE SECRETARY OF STATE.
CLINTON REPORTEDLY SAID:
TODAY, THERE WAS A REMINDER THAT
THE NEXT ADMINISTRATION WILL BE
MANAGING THE DEPLOYMENT OF U.S.
TROOPS IN AFGHANISTAN, NOW
ENTERING ITS 16th YEAR.
A SUICIDE BOMBING INSIDE THE
LARGEST U.S. BASE THERE, THE
TIGHTLY-GUARDED BAGRAM AIR BASE
NORTH OF KABUL, KILLED FOUR
AMERICANS, TWO SOLDIERS AND TWO
CIVILIAN CONTRACTORS WORKING FOR
THE MILITARY.
DEFENSE SECRETARY ASH CARTER
SAYS HE IS "DEEPLY SADDENED" BY
THE ATTACK THAT ALSO WOUNDED 16
AMERICAN SOLDIERS AND ONE POLISH
SOLDIER.
AN AFGHAN OFFICIAL SAID THE
ATTACKER DRESSED AS A LABORER
AND DETONATED A SUICIDE VEST
AFTER GETTING INSIDE THE BASE.
THE TALIBAN CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE ATTACK.
IT IS LEADING AN INSURGENCY
AGAINST THE U.S.-BACKED
GOVERNMENT.
THE U.S. STILL HAS MORE THAN
8,000 SOLDIERS IN AFGHANISTAN.
CINCINNATI'S MAYOR IS CALLING ON
PROSECUTORS TO SEEK A NEW TRIAL
OVER A POLICE SHOOTING, CAPTURED
ON VIDEOTAPE, OF AN UNARMED
BLACK MOTORIST LAST YEAR.
TODAY, A JUDGE DECLARED A
MISTRIAL IN THE MURDER TRIAL OF
RAY TENSING, THE 26-YEAR-OLD
WHITE FORMER UNIVERSITY OF
CINCINNATI POLICE OFFICER WHO
FATALLY SHOT 43-YEAR-OLD SAM
DUBOSE AFTER STOPPING HIM FOR A
MISSING LICENSE PLATE.
THE INCIDENT WAS DOCUMENTED BY
TENSING'S BODY CAMERA.
HE TESTIFIED HE HAD FEARED FOR
HIS LIFE AND THOUGHT DUBOSE WAS
GOING TO RUN HIM OVER WHEN HIS
ARM BECAME STUCK IN DUBOSE'S CAR
DOOR AS THE OFFICER TRIED TO
GRAB THE CAR KEYS.
TODAY, THE JURY DEADLOCKED AFTER
25 HOURS OF DELIBERATIONS SINCE
GETTING THE CASE WEDNESDAY.
PROSECUTORS SAY THE JURY WAS
LEANING TOWARDS AN ACQUITTAL FOR
MURDER AND A CONVICTION FOR THE
LESSER CHARGE OF VOLUNTARY
MANSLAUGHTER.
THE JUDGE SCHEDULED A HEARING IN
TWO WEEKS TO DETERMINE IF
TENSING WILL BE RETRIED.
INDIA'S PRIME MINISTER, NARENDRA
MODI, TODAY DEFENDED HIS
SURPRISE ANNOUNCEMENT THIS WEEK
TO REPLACE SOME CURRENCY
DENOMINATIONS AS A NECESSARY
MOVE TO FIGHT CORRUPTION AND TAX
EVASION, BUT THE MOVE HAS SET
OFF PANDEMONIUM AT BANKS AND
A.T.M. MACHINES ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE HAVE WAITED
IN LINES TO EXCHANGE THEIR NOW
WORTHLESS 500 AND 1,000 RUPEE
BILLS-- BILLS WORTH AROUND $7.50
TO $15 U.S.-- FOR NEW CURRENCY.
SOME BANKS RAN OUT OF THE NEW
2,000 RUPEE BILLS, AND HALF OF
INDIA'S 200,000 A.T.M. MACHINES
HAVE NOT YET BEEN RECONFIGURED
TO DISPENSE THEM.
THE GOVERNMENT SAID IT WILL TAKE
TWO TO THREE WEEKS TO
RECONFIGURE THE A.T.M.s.
FOR THE THIRD WEEKEND IN A ROW,
PROTESTERS IN SOUTH KOREA HAVE
FILLED THE STREETS OF SEOUL TO
DEMAND THE RESIGNATION OF
PRESIDENT PARK GEUN-HYE.
TONIGHT'S CANDLELIGHT PROTEST
WAS THE LARGEST YET WITH
ORGANIZERS CLAIMING A MILLION
PEOPLE; POLICE ESTIMATED THE
CROWD TO BE A QUARTER THAT SIZE.
PRESIDENT PARK HAS APOLOGIZED
FOR SEEKING THE ADVICE OF A
LONGTIME FRIEND WHO STANDS
ACCUSED OF FRAUD AND ABUSE OF
POWER FOR ALLEGEDLY USING HER
CONNECTIONS WITH PARK TO
PRESSURE CORPORATIONS TO DONATE
MONEY TO HER FOUNDATIONS.
SO FAR, THERE'S BEEN NO MOVE IN
SOUTH KOREA'S PARLIAMENT TO
IMPEACH PARK.
>> Stewart: DONALD TRUMP HAS
SIGNALED THAT HIGH ON HIS
DOMESTIC AGENDA IS ATTENDING TO
THE NATION'S INFRASTRUCTURE,
WHICH HE ADDRESSED IN HIS
ELECTION NIGHT VICTORY SPEECH.
>> WE ARE GOING TO FIX OUR INNER
CITIES AND REBUILD OUR HIGHWAYS,
BRIDGES, TUNNELS, AIRPORTS,
SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS.
WE'RE GOING TO REBUILD OUR
INFRASTRUCTURE, WHICH WILL
BECOME, BY THE WAY, SECOND TO
NONE.
AND WE WILL PUT MILLIONS OF OUR
PEOPLE TO WORK AS WE REBUILD IT.
>> Stewart: TWO WEEKS EARLIER,
OUTLINING HIS "CONTRACT WITH THE
AMERICAN VOTER," TRUMP PUT A
PRICE TAG ON HIS PLAN.
>> THE AMERICAN INFRASTRUCTURE
ACT LEVERAGES PUBLIC-PRIVATE
PARTNERSHIPS AND PRIVATE
INVESTMENTS THROUGH TAX
INCENTIVES TO SPARE $1 TRILLION
IN INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT
OVER THE NEXT TEN YEARS.
>> Stewart: THE AMERICAN SOCIETY
OF CIVIL ENGINEERS, IN ITS LAST
REPORT CARD, GRADED THE
COUNTRY'S INFRASTRUCTURE A
D-PLUS AND ESTIMATED $3.5
TRILLION IN SPENDING IS NEEDED
TO FIX IT.
WHEN IT COMES TO JOBS, TRUMP HAS
PROMISED TO CREATE 25 MILLION OF
THEM THROUGH INFRASTRUCTURE
SPENDING, TAX REDUCTION AND
SIMPLIFICATION, REGULATORY
RELIEF, TRADE DEAL REFORM AND
LIFTING THE RESTRICTIONS ON
AMERICAN ENERGY DEVELOPMENT.
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS
TRUMP'S INFRASTRUCTURE AND JOBS
PLANS ARE: LAURA BLISS, A WRITER
FOR CITYLAB, WHICH IS PART OF
ATLANTIC MEDIA HERE IN NEW YORK;
AND IN WASHINGTON, BINYAMIN
APPELBAUM, A CORRESPONDENT FOR
THE "NEW YORK TIMES."
LAURA, THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR
CIVIL ENGINEERS GAVE THE U.S.
INFRASTRUCTURE A D-PLUS RATING.
WHY DOES IT DESERVE A D-PLUS
RATING?
HOW DID WE GET TO A D-PLUS
>> YEAH, IT'S A GREAT QUESTION,
AND I THINK MOST AMERICANS
ACTUALLY HAVE PRETTY FIRSTHAND
EXPERIENCE JUST DRIVING ON
HIGHWAYS AND LOSING TIME AND
MONEY AND PRODUCTIVITY, FACING
ROADS THAT HAVE REALLY BEEN NOT
ADEQUATELY MAINTAINED.
AND WHAT WE'RE LOOK AT,
ACCORDING TO THE AMERICAN
SOCIETY OF CIVIL ENGINEERS, IS
ACTUALLY SOMETHING TO THE TUNE
UPON A $3 TRILLION
INFRASTRUCTURE SPENDING GAP.
SO THAT'S, YOU KNOW, THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN WHAT WE ARE
SPENDING AND WHAT WE'RE NOT TO
KEEP OUR ROADS, AS WELL AS OUR
BRIDGES, OUR AIRPORTS, OUR
TRANSIT SYSTEM, OUR PORTS,
REALLY FUNCTIONING AND SERVING
THE AMERICAN PUBLIC.
>> Stewart: WHAT'S AN EXAMPLE
OF RECENT OF RECENT D-PLUS FAIL
IN INFRASTRUCTURE?
>> YEAH, ABSOLUTELY, NOT EVEN
TWO MONTHS ANOTHER VERY CLOSE TO
HERE IN NEW YORK, NEW JERSEY
TRANSIT.
WE SAW THAT FATAL TRAIN CRASH,
AND THAT WAS PARTLY DRIVEN BY A
FAILURE TO KEEP THAT SYSTEM UP
TO DATE AS FAR AS ITS SAFETY
MECHANISMS.
OF COURSE, VERY MEMORABLY IN
FLINT, MICHIGAN, EARLIER THIS
YEAR, WE SAW THE FAILURE OF A
WATER SYSTEM TO BE REALLY
ADEQUATELY MAINTAINED.
>> Stewart: BINYAMIN, HAS
TRUMP SIGNALED WHAT THIS
INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN, WHAT HE'S
TALKED ABOUT, WHAT IT MIGHT LOOK
LIKE?
>> SO HE HAS SUGGESTED THAT THE
PORTION OF THE INFRASTRUCTURE
PLAN FOCUSED ON TRANSPORTATION
WOULD BE ABOUT $550 BILLION.
AND HIS ECONOMIC VARIES, PETER
NAVARO, HAS SKETCHED OUT A WAY
IT MIGHT BE PAID FOR.
HE SUGGESTED WHAT WE WOULD BE
TALKING ABOUT IS A TAX CREDIT
THAT WOULD INCENTIVIZE PRIVATE
DEVELOPERS TO PUT THEIR OWN
MONEY INTO PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
IN RETURN THEY PAY NOT VERY MUCH
AT ALL IN TAXES ON THOSE
INVESTMENTS AND THE GOVERNMENT
COULD RECOUP SOME OF THAT LOST
MONEY BY IMPOSING A ONE-TIME TAX
ON THE REPATRIATION OF PROFITS
THAT AMERICAN COMPANIES HAVE
BEEN KEEPING STASHED OVERSEAS.
>> Stewart: TRUMP FINDS
HIMSELF IN A UNIQUE POSITION.
THE REPUBLICANS ARE NOT ALWAYS
THAT EXCITED ABOUT SPENDING
MONEY ON THINGS LIKE
INFRASTRUCTURE, WHEREAS THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY OFTEN IS.
WHAT KIND OF POLITICAL
MANEUVERING IS HE GOING TO NEED
TO DO TO GET THIS OFF THE
GROUND?
THE OF?
THE LANDSCAPE IS INTERESTING.
PRETTY MUCH EVERYONE AGREES THE
INFRASTRUCTURE IS CRUMBLING.
WHERE IT BREAKS DOWN IS WHEN IT
COMES TO TALK ABOUT WHO IS GOING
TO PAY FOR IT.
REPUBLICANS HAVE BEEN RELUCTANT
TO INVEST FUNDS IN THESE TYPES
OF PROJECTS.
PRESIDENT OBAMA PROPOSED
SOMETHING SIMILAR TO WHAT DONALD
TRUMP IS PROPOSING, AND
CONGRESSIONAL REPUBLICANS
REFUSED TO TAKE IT UP AS AN
IDEA.
THE HOPE FOR MR. TRUMP IS THIS
ALTERNATIVE FINANCING MODEL WILL
BE ATTRACTIVE TO REPUBLICANS.
BUT THE STICKING POINT FOR MANY
REPUBLICANS IS THAT THEY DON'T
ACCEPT HIS ARGUMENT THAT THIS IS
GOOD FOR THE ECONOMY.
>> Stewart: LAURA, FROM YOUR
RPS, WHAT KIND OF PRIVATE-FUNDED
INFRASTRUCTURE HAS WORKED OR
HASN'T WORKED?
>> PRIVATIZATION OF PUBLIC
PROJECTS IS NOT AN INHERENTLY
BAD IDEA, AND IT CAN WORK, YOU
KNOW, ESPECIALLY ON A PROJECT
LIKE A TOLL ROAD, FOR EXAMPLE,
WHERE A PRIVATE COMPANY IS SORT
OF GUARANTEED REVENUES DOWN THE
LINE AFTER THE PROJECT IS
COMPLETED.
BUT AS A FUNDING MECHANISM FOR
THE VAST MAJORITY OF
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS THAT OUR
COUNTRY COULD REALLY BENEFIT
FROM, IT DOESN'T REALLY SEEM TO
HOLD UP BECAUSE THEY'RE NOT
GOING TO BE PARTICULARLY
LUCRATIVE IN THE LONG RUN FOR
THOSE PRIVATE COMPANIES.
THEY'RE REALLY DESIGNED--
SUPPOSED TO BE DESIGNED FOR THE
PUBLIC GOOD, AND NOT TO-- NOT TO
FORCE THE PUBLIC TO PAY VERY,
VERY HIGH USAGE RATES.
>> Stewart: BINYAMIN, TRUMP
SAID THAT HE'S TIED HIS JOB
CREATION TO THIS INFRASTRUCTURE
IDEA.
DOES THAT WORK?
DOES THAT MAKE SENSE WITH WHAT
HE'S PROPOSED?
>> IT REALLY DEPENDS ON THE
DETAILS.
SO, YOU KNOW, INTERESTINGLY
ENOUGH, FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF
MANY DEMOCRATS, THE EXTENT TO
WHICH THE GOVERNMENT PROVIDES
FUNDING FOR THESE PROJECTS IS AN
IMPORTANT CONSIDERATION BECAUSE
IN THEIR VIEW, THE TYPES OF
PROJECTS THAT ARE MOST LIKELY TO
BE BUILT WITH GOVERNMENT FUNDING
ARE THE ONES LEAST LIKELY TO BE
BUILT BY THE PRIVATE SECTOR AND,
THEREFORE, THE MOST LIKELY TO
CREATE NEW JOBS.
IF YOU'RE SIMPLY PROVIDING A TAX
SUBSIDY SO COMPANIES CAN BUILD
THINGS THEY WERE ALREADY GOING
TO BUILD AND IT'S JUST MORE
PROFITABLE FOR THEM TO DO SO,
YOU DON'T CREATE A LOT OF JOBS
BY TO GO THAT.
YOU JUST PUT MONEY IN THE POCKET
OF PEOPLE WHO OWN THOSE
COMPANIES.
IF, HOWEVER, WHAT YOU'RE DOING
IS PROVIDING FUNDING FOR
PROJECTS THAT WOULDN'T OTHERWISE
GET OFF THE JOB, THAT HAS THE
POTENTIAL TO ACTUALLY CREATE NEW
JOBS.
THE QUESTION OF THE FUNDING
MODEL ISN'T JUST A QUESTION OF
WHO PAYS FOR IT BUT A QUESTION
OF HOW MUCH ECONOMIC BOSTON
THERE'S LIKELY TO BE.
>> Stewart: BINYAMIN, WILL
POLITICS PLAY A ROLE HERE AS TO
WHICH INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
GET STARTED FIRST?
>> YEAH, I THINK IT'S FAIR TO
SAY THAT POLITICS WILL PLAY A
ROLE HERE, ABSOLUTELY.
THE DETAILS, AGAIN, MATTER.
IF WHAT HE'S PROPOSING IS A TAX
CREDIT THAT ANYONE CAN TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF, THE GOVERNMENT
WOULD HAVE SOMEWHAT LESS OF A
ROLE IN SELECTING PROJECTS.
DEVELOPERS WOULD HAVE TO LINE UP
AND MEET THE REQUIREMENTS FOR
THE TAX CREDIT.
BUT, AGAIN, TO THE EXTENT THAT
THE GOVERNMENT STARTS ALLOCATING
THE FUNDS, YEAH, CONGRESS HAS A
LONG HISTORY OF PICKING OUT PET
TRANSPORTATION PROHIBITS FOR
FUNDING.
IT'S A FAIR BET THAT THAT WOULD
HAPPEN AGAIN.
>> Stewart: LAURA, WE SHOULD
POINT OUT THAT VOTERS SEEM TO BE
HUNGRY FOR INCREASED FUND AGO AT
LEAST INCREASED SUPPORT OF
INFRASTRUCTURE.
ON MANY LOCAL INITIATIVE
BALLOTS, THERE WAS A GREAT SHOW
OF SUPPORT FOR THIS, CORRECT?
>> YEAH.
AT LEAST CERTAIN TYPES OF
INFRASTRUCTURE.
SORT OF-- I THINK A STORY THAT
WAS DEFINITELY OVERSHADOWED ON
TUESDAY NIGHT WAS A REAL VICTORY
IN THE PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
SECTOR, SOMETHING LIKE 70% OF
THE BALLOT MEASURES NATIONWIDE
THAT WERE ABOUT FUNDING TRANSIT
GOT PASSED.
SO, YEAH, YOU DID SORT OF SEE
THIS STORY OF VOTERS, PRIMARILY
IN DENSE, URBAN CENTERS, REALLY,
YOU KNOW, VOTING FOR A MORE
URBAN FUTURE AND, YOU KNOW,
DEMONSTRATING A WILLINGNESS TO
PAY FOR IT.
IN TERMS OF INVESTMENT AND
TRANSIT.
LESS SO, YOU KNOW, THERE WAS--
THERE WERE A NUMBER OF MEASURES
THAT WERE ALSO, YOU KNOW, GEARED
TOWARDS HIGHWAY FUNDING, OTHER
KINDS OF TRANSPORTATION
PROJECTS, LESS SO ABOUT WATER
INFRASTRUCTURE, ENERGY
INFRASTRUCTURE, YOU KNOW, PORTS,
AIRPORTS.
THOSE WERE A LITTLE BIT LESSER
SEEN.
>> Stewart: BINYAMIN, YOU
WANTED TO ADD SOMETHING?
>> YEAH, YOU KNOW, THE SUPPORT
FOR THE TRANSIT MEASURES THAT
LAURA WAS JUST TALKING ABOUT
CAME MOSTLY FROM PARTS OF THE
COUNTRY THAT ALSO SUPPORTED
HILLARY CLINTON.
ONE ISSUE DONALD TRUMP IS GOING
TO NEED TO GRAPPLE WITH IS HOUSE
REPUBLICANS LARGELY REPRESENT
PARTS OF THE COUNTRY THAT HAVE
LESS INFRASTRUCTURE AND ARE
PERHAPS LESS EXCITED ABOUT
INCREASED INFRASTRUCTURE
SPENDING.
IT'S NOT CLEAR THAT HE CAN RALLY
A MAJORITY OF THE HOUSE RIGHT
NOW TO BACK A REBUILDING OF
LaGUARDIA AIRPORT, FOR
EXAMPLE.
THEY MAY NOT CARE HOW BAD
CONDITIONS ARE IN NEW YORK.
>> Stewart: ALL RIGHT, THIS IS
TO BE CONTINUED, IT SOUNDS LIKE.
LAURA BLISS FROM "CITYLAB," AND
BINYAMIN APPELBAUM FROM THE "NEW
YORK TIMES," THANKS TO BOTH OF
YOU.
>> THANKS SO MUCH FOR HAVING US.
>> Stewart: IRAQ'S GOVERNMENT
SAYS ITS SECURITY FORCES, WITH
U.S. SUPPORT, RECLAIMED TWO MORE
DISTRICTS IN MOSUL TODAY FROM
ISIS MILITANTS.
THIS FOOTAGE RELEASED TODAY BY
THE IRAQI DEFENSE MINISTRY SHOWS
HELICOPTER ATTACKS ON ISIS
POSITIONS TO DISLODGE MILITANTS
WHO HAVE OCCUPIED IRAQ'S SECOND
LARGEST CITY FOR TWO YEARS.
THE DEFENSE MINISTRY SAYS IT HAS
DESTROYED MORE THAN 40 ISIS
HIDEOUTS AND KILLED ABOUT 900
MILITANTS IN THE PAST MONTH.
AS THOUSANDS OF MOSUL RESIDENTS
TRY TO FLEE THE CITY, THE UNITED
NATIONS REPORTS ISIS IS CARRYING
OUT MASS EXECUTIONS OF
CIVILIANS.
JOINING ME NOW TO TALK ABOUT
THIS IS ALEX MILUTINOVIC, WHO IS
DIRECTING RELIEF EFFORTS IN IRAQ
FOR THE INTERNATIONAL RESCUE
COMMITTEE.
HE IS IN THE IRAQI CITY OF
ERBIL, ABOUT 50 MILES EAST OF
MOSUL.
ALEX, WE UNDERSTAND FROM THE
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION,
48,000 PEOPLE HAVE FLED MOSUL.
WHERE ARE THEY GOING?
>> AT THE MOMENT THEY HAVE OVER
50,000 PEOPLE THAT HAVE FLED THE
SURROUNDING MOSUL CITY.
TWO-THIRDS ARE LEAVING TOWARDS
THE CAMPS AND THE REMAINING ARE
LIVING WITH HOST COMMUNITIES.
>> Stewart: IS THE ISLAMIC STATE
ALLOWING PEOPLE TO LEAVE?
THERE HAVE BEEN REPORTS THAT THE
IDEA IS TO USE CIVILIANS.
THEIR IDEA IS TO USE CIVILIANS
AS HUMAN SHIELDS.
>> UNFORTUNATELY, THE CIVILIANS
NOT ALLOWED TO LEAVE THE MOSUL
CITY.
THEY ARE BEING USED AS A HUMAN
SHIELD AND OUR CONCERN GOES TO
THE PEOPLE OF MOSUL CITY WHO ARE
NOW TRAPPED IN A VERY DIFFICULT
SITUATION.
THEY ARE BASICALLY TRAPPED IN
THE FIGHTING ZONE AND THEY HAVE
A HARD TIME FLEEING AND FINDING
SAFETY.
>> Stewart: AND HOW ARE THE
CONDITIONS FOR THE PEOPLE WHO
ARE STILL IN MOSUL, THE
CITIZENS, IN TERMS OF FOOD,
WATER, MEDICAL CARE?
>> BASICALLY, MOSUL CITY HAS
BEEN UNDER ISIS CONTROL FOR THE
PAST TWO YEARS.
AND DURING THESE TWO YEARS,
PEOPLE HAVE SPENT ALL OF THEIR
SAVINGS.
SO THE SITUATION IS GETTING
DIRE.
THE MEDICINES ARE ALMOST NOT
AVAILABLE.
THE FOOD IS AVAILABLE, BUT THE
COST IS RISING AND WE ARE SEEING
MORE AND MORE PEOPLE THAT COME
OUT THAT ARE MALNOURISHED.
IT'S A PRETTY DIFFICULT
SITUATION AND WE ARE HOPING VERY
SOON WE WILL BE ABLE TO PROVIDE
ASSIST ATTENDANCE EVERYONE WHO
FLEES THE CITY.
THAT CAME OUT RECENTLY
DESCRIBING THE SITUATION IN
MOSUL DESCRIBED THE POSSIBILITY
OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS BEING USED?
>> BASICALLY, WE HAVE SEEN
REPORTS BEFORE OF THE CHEMICAL
WEAPONS BEING USED.
IT IS OUR BIGGEST FEAR.
CIVILIANS BASICALLY HAVE TO BE
PROTECTED BY ALL PARTY TO THIS
CONFLICT AND WE NEED TO ENSURE
CIVILIAN SAFETY IS THE MOST
IMPORTANT PRIORITY.
WE ARE CONCERNED.
WE HAVE SEEN CIVILIAN CASUALTIES
AND WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THIS
DOESN'T REPEAT AGAIN.
>> Stewart: THE FIGHT OVER
MOSUL IS ABOUT A MONTH OLD AT
THIS POINT.
THE U.N. REPORT IN THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" CITED REPORTS OF PEOPLE
BEING EXECUTED, CIVILIANS, AND
BEING LABELED AS "TRAITORS" AND
BEING KILLED AS A BETRAYAL.
YET FOCUS ON THIS BETRAYAL?
AND YET PUBLIC EXECUTION OF
CITIZENS IN MOSUL?
>> ISIS HAS A BRUTAL RULE.
FOR THE PAST TWO YEARS THEY HAVE
BEEN RULING WITH AN IRON FIST IN
THE MOSUL AREA, ALL AREAS UNDER
THEIR CONTROL.
WE HAVE SEEN A NUMBER OF CASES
AND HEARD ABOUT A NUMBER OF
CASES OF CIVILIANS BEING
EXECUTED FOR AS LITTLE AS HAVING
AWE MOBILE PHONE.
THERE IS A FEAR, MOST OF THE
PEOPLE IN THE CITY OR SOME
PEOPLE IN THE CITY ARE ACTUALLY
COOPERATING WITH THE SECURITY
FORCES SO THEY'RE USING THIS
OPPORTUNITY TO SEND A MESSAGE TO
ALL THE PEOPLE WHO ARE TRYING TO
EITHER ORGANIZE A COUP OR TRY TO
PROVIDE INFORMATION TO THE
SECURITY FORCES THAT THEY WILL
BE KILLED.
SO OUR CONCERN, AGAIN, GOES FOR
THE CIVILIAN POPULATION OF
MOSUL.
THEY'RE TRAPPED RIGHT NOW, AND
THE FIGHTING IS COMING CLOSE.
SO THEY'RE SEEING A LOT MORE--
THEY'RE HEARING A LOT MORE
EXPLOSIONS.
THERE ARE A LOT MORE ACTIVITIES
ON THE OUTSKIRTS OF THE MOSUL
CITY AND THE POPULATION OF THE
CITY IS TERRIFIED.
THEY HAVE BEEN LIVING TWO YEARS
UNDER THEIR RULE AND THEY WOULD
NEED A LOT OF ASSISTANCE,
ESPECIALLY WITH MENTAL HEALTH,
ONCE THEY ARE ABLE TO REACH
SAFETY.
>> Stewart: ALEX MILUTINOVIC
OF THE INTERNATIONAL RESCUE
COMMITTEE.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR YOUR WORK
AND FOR BEING WITH US.
>> Stewart: IN ALL NINE
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS SINCE
1984, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY
HISTORY PROFESSOR ALLAN LICHTMAN
HAS CORRECTLY PREDICTED THE
OUTCOME NOT BY USING OPINION
POLLS BUT BY USING A SYSTEM HE
HELPED CREATE, 13 SIMPLE
TRUE/FALSE STATEMENTS TESTING
WHETHER THE INCUMBENT PARTY
WILL RETAIN OR LOSE THE WHITE
HOUSE.
PROFESSOR LICHTMAN JOINS ME NOW
VIA SKYPE FROM DOHA, QATAR.
PROFESSOR, HOW DID YOU ARRIVE AT
THESE 13 TRUE/FALSE STATEMENTS?
AND WHAT IS THE RULE THAT
DETERMINES THE OUTCOME?
>> I CAME ACROSS THE KEYS TO THE
WHITE HOUSE TOTALLY BY ACCIDENT.
IN 1981, I MET THE WORLD'S
LEADING AUTHORITY IN EARTHQUAKE
PREDICTION.
AND IT WAS HE WHO SUGGESTED WE
COLLABORATE USING HIS
MATHEMATICAL MODELING TO PREDICT
AMERICAN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS.
SO WE STUDIED EVERY AMERICAN
ELECTION FROM 1860 TO 1980.
THIS WAS IN 1981, GUIDED BY THE
THESIS THAT SAYS PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTIONS ARE PRIMARILY
JUDGMENTS ON THE PERFORMANCE AND
STRENGTH OF THE PARTY HOLDING
THE WHITE HOUSE.
AND FROM THAT STUDY, WE CAME UP
WITH 13 SIMPLE, TRUE/FALSE
QUESTIONS, WHERE AN ANSWER OF
"TRUE" ALWAYS FAVORS THE
RE-ELECTION OF THE WHITE HOUSE
PARTY.
AND WE CAME UP WITH A REALLY
SIMPLE DECISION RULE: IF SIX OR
MORE OF THE KEYS ARE FALSE, THAT
BODES DEFEAT FOR THE PARTY
HOLDING THE WHITE HOUSE.
>> Stewart: WELL, LET'S LOOK
AT THOSE FIRST FOUR RULES, THOSE
KEYS, BECAUSE THEY'RE BASICALLY
ABOUT POLITICAL CLIMATE, AS YOU
SAID, SOMETHING THAT YOU CAN,
YOU KNOW, OBJECTIVELY TAKE A
LOOK AT.
THEY WERE FALSE.
FOR THE INCUMBENT PARTY, FOR THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY.
SO WHAT WERE THE OTHER TWO THAT
SENT IT OVER THE EDGE FOR THE
REPUBLICANS?
>> CRITICALLY, THE PARTY HOLDING
THE WHITE HOUSE DID NOT ACHIEVE
MAJOR POLICY CHANGE IN THE
SECOND OBAMA TERM.
SO THEY DIDN'T HAVE A BIG
DOMESTIC ACCOMPLISHMENT TO RUN
ON.
IN ADDITION, THEY DIDN'T ACHIEVE
A BIG, FLASHY FOREIGN POLICY
SUCCESS.
>> Stewart: YOUR MODEL TAKES
INTO ACCOUNT THE GENERIC
REPUBLICAN CANDIDATE AND THE
GENERIC DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATE,
BUT WE REALLY DIDN'T HAVE A
GENERIC REPUBLICAN CANDIDATE
THIS TIME AROUND.
SO WHY DO YOU THINK IT WORKS
STILL?
>> WELL, THE FORCE OF HISTORY IS
VERY POWERFUL.
THIS IS A VERY ROBUST MODEL
BECAUSE IT GOES RETROSPECTIVELY
BACK TO 1860 AND PROSPECTIVELY
AHEAD TO THE PRESENT.
SO IT TAKES INTO ACCOUNT
ENORMOUS CHANGES IN OUR
POLITICS.
>> Stewart: YOU'VE MADE A
POINT OF SAYING, "POLLS ARE NOT
PREDICTIONS."
EVERYONE THIS WEEK HAS BEEN
TALKING ABOUT HOW WRONG THE
POLLS WERE.
YOU CAN EXPLAIN THAT STATEMENT?
>> FIRST OF ALL, POLLS ARE
SNAPSHOTS.
THEY GIVE YOU SENTIMENT AT A
PARTICULAR POINT IN TIME, AND IT
DOES NOT NECESSARILY FOLLOW
THAT, THAT'S GOING TO HOLD AT A
FUTURE POINT IN TIME.
IN ADDITION, THE POLLS ARE
ENTIRELY DEPENDENT ON PREDICTING
WHO IS GOING TO BE A LIKELY
VOTER, AND THEY REALLY DON'T
KNOW VERY WELL WHO THE LIKELY
VOTERS ARE.
>> Stewart: DO YOUR KEYS, OR
YOUR FACTORS, YOUR STATEMENTS,
TAKE INTO ACCOUNT OCTOBER
SURPRISES AT ALL OR EMOTIONS OR
PASSIONS?
>> I INITIALLY MADE MY
PREDICTION FOR A DONALD TRUMP
VICTORY IN LATE SEPTEMBER BEFORE
THE WOMEN COMING OUT ALLEGING
SEXUAL ASSAULT BY DONALD TRUMP,
BEFORE THE COMEY LETTER AND THE
COMEY RETRACTION.
>> AND DOUBLED DOWN ON THAT
PREDICTION ON OCTOBER 28.
SO MY PREDICTIONS WERE NOT
TURNING ON THESE CAMPAIGN
EVENTS.
>> Stewart: PROFESSOR ALAN
LICHTMAN, THANKS SO MUCH FOR
SHARING ALL YOUR INFORMATION.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Stewart: READ THE 13
STATEMENTS THAT ALLAN LICHTMAN
USED TO PREDICT THE OUTCOME OF
THE 2016 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: IN APRIL, WE BROUGHT
YOU THE STORY OF SONIA CACY, A
68-YEAR-OLD TEXAS WOMAN
CONVICTED IN 1993 OF MURDERING
HER UNCLE BY ARSON AND SENTENCED
TO 99 YEARS IN PRISON.
HERE'S AN UPDATE TO HER STORY.
CACY MAINTAINED HER INNOCENCE
THROUGHOUT HER TRIAL AND
CONVICTION, EVEN AFTER THE
CASE'S TOXICOLOGIST PRODUCED
EVIDENCE THAT HER UNCLE HAD
TRACES OF GASOLINE ON HIS
CLOTHES.
SONIA, DID YOU HAVE ANYTHING TO
DO WITH THE FIRE THAT OCCURRED
ON NOVEMBER 10, 1991?
>> NO, I DID NOT.
I DID NOT EVER, ANYTHING.
NO.
>> Stewart: LATER EVIDENCE FOUND
THAT TOXICOLOGIST'S REPORT WAS
FAULTY AND THAT THE FIRE WAS
STARTED ACCIDENTALLY.
CACY WAS RELEASED FROM PRISON ON
PAROLE BUT WAS NEVER EXONERATED
AND HAD TO REPORT TO A PAROLE
OFFICER ONCE A MONTH FOR 17
YEARS.
>> IT'S A BIG BURDEN BECAUSE YOU
CAN'T EVEN GET A PLACE TO LIVE.
EVERYBODY DOES YOUR BACKGROUND--
WHERE YOU'RE LIVING, WHERE
YOU'RE GOING TO WORK.
>> Stewart: THE INNOCENCE
PROJECT OF TEXAS FILED A MOTION
TO REOPEN CACY'S CASE UNDER THE
"JUNK SCIENCE LAW," A NEW LAW IN
TEXAS THAT MAKES IT POSSIBLE TO
APPEAL A CASE IF THERE IS
SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE THAT WAS NOT
AVAILABLE AT THE TIME OF
CONVICTION OR IF THERE IS NEW
EVIDENCE THAT CONTRADICTS WHAT
WAS USED TO CONVICT.
>> SONIA IS A REAL, LIVE EXAMPLE
OF SOMEBODY WHOSE LIFE WAS
REALLY DESTROYED BASED UPON BAD
SCIENTIFIC TESTIMONY IN COURT.
>> Stewart: ON NOVEMBER 2,
TEXAS' COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEALS
FOUND CACY NOT GUILTY OF THE
DEATH OF HER UNCLE, FULFILLING
HER DEAREST WISH FOR HER AND HER
FAMILY.
>> MY HOPES FOR THE FUTURE ARE
TO GET EVERYTHING LIKE THIS OVER
WITH AND TO BE EXONERATED BEFORE
I DIE.
AND IT WOULD BE REALLY NICE FOR
MY CHILDREN.
>> Stewart: FINALLY, TOMORROW
MARKS ONE YEAR SINCE A GROUP OF
ISIS TERRORISTS ATTACKED PARIS,
KILLING 130 PEOPLE WITH SUICIDE
BOMBS AND AK-47 ASSAULT RIFLES.
MANY VICTIMS HAD BEEN ENJOYING A
FRIDAY NIGHT OUT IN CAFES AND
RESTAURANTS AND 90 OF THEM HAVE
BEEN ATTENDING A ROCK CONCERT AT
THE BATACLAN CONCERT HALL.
THE BATACLAN REOPENED TONIGHT,
AND ROCK SUPERSTAR STING
PERFORMED IN MEMORY OF THOSE WHO
DIED.
THIS VIDEO SHOWS TODAY'S SOUND-
CHECK BEFORE THE ONE-HOUR
CONCERT.
VICTIMS' FAMILY MEMBERS WERE
OFFERED FREE TICKETS AND
PROCEEDS WENT TO CHARITIES
HELPING VICTIMS' FAMILY.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.